episode 37 (#302)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/37.md

---
layout: episode

> title:  "35: Packaging and modernizing Trino"

Reviewer: 37: Trino community support

Author: I want the title to be a little playful. How about:

> 37: Trino powers up the community support

date: 2022-04-21
tags: tarball rpm docker container java 17
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections:
   - title: "Releases 382 to 385"
     desc: "Details about features and fixes in the new releases"
     time: 0
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "tbd"
     time: 0
   - title: "Pull requests of the episode"
     desc: "PR 12259: Support updating Iceberg table partitioning"
     time: 0
   - title: "Demo of the episode"
     desc: "Iceberg Table Partition migrations"
     time: 0
   - title: "Question of the episode"
     desc: "Can I force a pushdown join into a connected data source?"
     time: 0
---

## Releases 382 to 385

> Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

Reviewer: ```
## Releases 382 to 386

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 382](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-382.html)

* Support for reading wildcard tables in the BigQuery connector.
* Support for adding columns in the Delta Lake connector.
* Support updating Iceberg table partitioning.
* Improved `INSERT` performance in the MySQL, Oracle, and PostgreSQL connectors.
* Basic authentication in the Prometheus connector.
* Exchange spooling on Google Cloud Storage.

[Trino 383](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-383.html)

* New `json_exists`, `json_query`, and `json_value` functions.
* Support for table comments in the Delta Lake connector.
* Support IAM roles for exchange spooling on S3.
* Improved performance for aggregation queries.

[Trino 384](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-384.html)

* Support for new pass-through query table function for Druid, MariaDB, MySQL,
  Oracle, PostgreSQL, Redshift, SingleStore and SQL Server.

[Trino 385](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-385.html)

* New `json_array` and `json_object` functions.
* Support for time travel syntax in the Iceberg connector.
* Support for `timestamp(p)` type in MariaDB connector.
* Performance improvements in Iceberg connector.

[Trino 386](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-386.html)

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Manfred:

* 383 had a regression, don't use it.
* As mentioned last time, exchange spooling now supported on the three major
  cloud object storage systems.
* Query pass-through table function is a massive feature. We are adding this to
  other connectors, and more details coming in a future special episode.
* Special props to [Kasia](https://github.com/kasiafi) for all the JSON and
  polymorphic table functions work.

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 382](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-382.html),
[Trino 383](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-383.html),
[Trino 384](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-384.html),
[Trino 385](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-385.html),
and
[Trino 386](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-386.html).
```

[Trino 382](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-382.html)

* 

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Manfred:

* 

More detailed information is available in the release notes for
[Trino 382](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-382.html),
[Trino 383](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-383.html),
[Trino 384](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-384.html),
and
[Trino 385](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-385.html).

## Concept of the episode: 

## Pull requests of the episode: PR 12259: Support updating Iceberg table partitioning

https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12259

## Demo of the episode: Iceberg Table Partition migrations

> ## Question of the episode: Can I force a pushdown join into a connected data source?

Reviewer 2: I think that you can discuss the join pushdown we have: conditions, limitations, etc. Join pushdown is a different story than query pass-through via PTF, especially that it does not require modifying the query in any way to work. 

After you explain that, you can mention query pass-through via PTF, which can be considered the alternative way to pushdown join, and mention that it will be covered in another episode.

want to play around without having to bother or wait for anyone to respond. As
it stands today, there is some work that Brian and Monica have started to create
in this area to make the onbaording simpler. 

A very common self-service getting started material is the 
[trino-getting-started](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-getting-started)
repo that Brian created to house some demonstrations he does on this broadcast
to show off some new feature or connector capabilities. This has been a good
way to offer folks a simple environment to get them started, but the only way
to find this repository is to ask someone first. It would be ideal to showcase
getting started materials as part of the default experience of learning about
Trino.

Monica is working now on building up some demos using SaaS products like
Starburst Galaxy as another method of using Trino without needing to install
Docker among having to use any of your hardware to run through some examples.
These options are typically more UI driven and much more approachable by
members of the community that aren't engineers or administrators that simply
want to try Trino without much setup.

> ### Release Process (Cole)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Release Process (Cole)

- Brief personal introduction and definition of what the release manager role is about.
- Quick overview of how Trino manages weekly releases.
- Explain release notes as part of that process.
- The goal is a weekly cadence, but there are occasional missed weeks and emergency releases to break that up.
- Who needs v.1.2.3443.390 when you can just have a single, incrementing number?

```

> #### Filling out PR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Filling out PR

We've got a handy PR template that exists for all contributors to use when they've submitting a pull request to Trino. Most of it is simple and self-explanatory - we ask you to describe what's happening, where the change is happening, and what type of change it is. These are for the sake of the reviewers, giving them some important context so they understand what's going on when they review the code. For simpler changes, it's not usually necessary to go into a ton of detail here, but it's usually nice to give a little summary if you think it's appropriate.

The next steps are what really matter for every single PR that's going to be merged - the documentation and release notes for a change. These are about communicating to our users. Documentation refers to Trino docs, not code comments - if Trino users will need to be told how to use the feature you're changing because of how you're changing it, that means we need to have documentation for it. The PR template gives the options for how to go about this, but it's incredibly helpful to have this filled out. Similarly, we ask whether or not release notes are necessary for the change, and what release notes you would propose for your change. Generally speaking, if it needs to be documented, it almost always should have a release note. Even if it isn't documented, a release note might be a good idea - things like performance improvements don't require our users to change how they use Trino, but they won't mind knowing that something has gotten faster/better! The release process involves heavy editing of release notes, so it's ok for the suggested note to be imperfect.
```

this, but it's incredibly helpful to have this filled out. Similarly, we ask
whether or not release notes are necessary for the change, and what release
notes you would propose for your change. Generally speaking, if it needs to be
documented, it almost always should have a release note. Even if it isn't
documented, a release note might be a good idea - things like performance
improvements don't require our users to change how they use Trino, but they
won't mind knowing that something has gotten faster/better! The release process
involves heavy editing of release notes, so it's ok for the suggested note to be
imperfect.

### What is Developer Experience?

Trino is a technology that is built by developers but also heavily used by 
developers. We want to ensure that the experience of both contributors and users
of Trino is the best possible. To do that, we have to focus on many different
aspects of this experience, from committing code to the CLIs and tools we offer
for debugging queries and most importantly to building a sustainable community
that can give answers and drive the future of the project. This is what DX is
for Trino.

### Community Metrics

> #### Trino-CICD Repository
> 
> <https://github.com/nineinchnick/trino-cicd>
> 
> Where to find it, how it works (Powered by Trino), etc...
> 
> #### How understanding these metrics helps the experience of contributors
> 
> By tracking this, we make sure to provide a neutral experience for all and this
> also helps us figure out where we need more resources to focus on.
> 
> review process, merging process, and helps us advocate for more resources from
> companies and vendors.
> 
> Are there any other metrics that are important to all of you in the contributor

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

A while ago we started gathering metrics related to [the Trino GitHub repository](https://github.com/trinodb/trino).
This helped us identify issues like huge CI queue times, but most importantly, verify
that the changes we made improved things, and how much. 

In February this year, the 95th percentile of the CI queue time (not even the total run time!)
was as high as almost 7 hours. Trino uses public GitHub runners and there can only be
60 jobs running concurrently at the same time. This is a bottleneck because Trino
has extensive test coverage for the core engine and all plugins (connectors).
Because we can't increase the number of runners, we looked into doing impact analysis
to skip tests for modules not impacted by any change in a pull request.

Since April, the 95th percentile of the CI queue time is under 1 hour, even though the number of contributions
is at an all-time high.

We keep track of these selected metrics in reports we create by running queries using the Trino CLI,
saving the results in a markdown file and publishing them as static pages using GitHub pages.
The data is also gathered using third-party Trino connectors for the GitHub API and Git repositories.
There's a GitHub actions workflow running on a schedule, that spins up a Trino server, so there's no
infrastructure to maintain, except for a single S3 bucket.  
All of it is publicly available in the [nineinchnick/trino-cicd](https://github.com/nineinchnick/trino-cicd) repository.  On the right, there's a link to GitHub pages with reports.

We keep adding more reports, like:
* [flaky tests](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/flaky/)
* [pull request activity](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/pr/)

By being data-driven and transparent, we make sure to provide a neutral experience for all
and this also helps us figure out where we need more resources to focus on.

We're open to suggestions on what to track and which metrics to report on, so feel free
to open issues and pull requests in the repository mentioned above or start a thread on the Trino Slack.
```

> 

Author: This part is for you @nineinchnick! Just comment your sections whenever you're ready!

---
layout: episode
title:  "37: Trino powers up the community support"
date: 2022-06-16
tags: trino community devrel iceberg
youtube_id: "oG-HSB3tCY8"
wistia_id: ""
sections:
   - title: "Releases 382 to 386"
     desc: "Details about features and fixes in the new releases"
     time: 0
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "How to strengthen the Trino community"
     time: 0
   - title: "Pull requests of the episode"

>      desc: "PR 12259: Support updating Iceberg table partitioning"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     desc: "PR 12259: Support updates of Iceberg table partitioning"
```
```suggestion
     desc: "PR 12259: Support updating Iceberg table partitioning"
```

* New `json_exists`, `json_query`, and `json_value` functions.
* Support for table comments in the Delta Lake connector.
* Support IAM roles for exchange spooling on S3.
* Improved performance for aggregation queries.

[Trino 384](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-384.html)

* Support for new pass-through query table function for Druid, MariaDB, MySQL,
  Oracle, PostgreSQL, Redshift, SingleStore and SQL Server.

[Trino 385](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-385.html)

* New `json_array` and `json_object` functions.
* Support for time travel syntax in the Iceberg connector.
* Support for `timestamp(p)` type in MariaDB connector.
* Performance improvements in Iceberg connector.

[Trino 386](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-386.html)

* Improved performance for fault-tolerant query execution
* Faster queries on Delta Lake

Additional highlights worth a mention according to Manfred:

* 383 had a regression, don't use it.
* As mentioned last time, exchange spooling now supported on the three major
  cloud object storage systems.
* Query pass-through table function is a massive feature. We are adding this to

>   other connectors, and more details coming in a future special episode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  other connectors, and more details are coming in a future special episode.
```
```suggestion
  other connectors, and more details coming in a future special episode.
```

>   other connectors, and more details coming in a future special episode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  other connectors, and more details are coming in a future special episode.
```
```suggestion
  other connectors, and more details coming in a future special episode.
```

> * Special props to [Kasia](https://github.com/kasiafi) for all the JSON and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Special props to [Kasia](https://github.com/kasiafi) for all the new JSON functions.
```

> * Special props to [Kasia](https://github.com/kasiafi) for all the JSON and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Special props to [Kasia](https://github.com/kasiafi) for all the new JSON functions.
```

[Trino 382](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-382.html),
[Trino 383](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-383.html),
[Trino 384](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-384.html),
[Trino 385](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-385.html),
and
[Trino 386](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-386.html).

## Concept of the episode: How to strengthen the Trino community

What is community and why has this word seen more use around technical projects,
particularly those in the open-source space. There's really no formal definition
of community in the context of technology. David Spinks, author of the book, 
"The Business of Belonging", defines community as:

> A group of people who feel a shared sense of belonging.

For technical projects, this sense of belonging generally comes from the shared
affinity towards a specific product, like Trino, or it could be a brand that
hosts many products, like Google or Microsoft. There's a lot that could be 
discussed here regarding why communities have become an essential ingredient to
a project's success. The quick answer I like to offer folks is that projects,

> open-source or proprietary, that have strong communities behind them, tend to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-source or proprietary, that have strong communities behind them
```
```suggestion
open-source or proprietary, that have strong communities behind them, tend to
```

> open-source or proprietary, that have strong communities behind them, tend to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-source or proprietary, that have strong communities behind them
```
```suggestion
open-source or proprietary, that have strong communities behind them, tend to
```

> move faster with the ebbs and flows of the desire of the larger population

Reviewer: ```suggestion
innovate and grow faster, and are more successful overall.
```

> move faster with the ebbs and flows of the desire of the larger population

Reviewer: ```suggestion
innovate and grow faster, and are more successful overall.
```

> versus serving the immediate needs of a smaller customer base. While that is

Reviewer: Remove this line

> versus serving the immediate needs of a smaller customer base. While that is

Reviewer: Remove this line

> just the tip of the iceberg, let's just assume that healthy communities make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A healthy community is crucial for a health project.
```
```suggestion
just the tip of the iceberg, let's just assume that healthy communities make
```

> just the tip of the iceberg, let's just assume that healthy communities make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A healthy community is crucial for a health project.
```
```suggestion
just the tip of the iceberg, let's just assume that healthy communities make
```

for healthy projects.

As such, the Trino Software Foundation (TSF) recognizes that Trino will only be
as successful as the health of the community that builds, tests, uses, and 

> shares it. The activities around building a technical community falls in between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shares it. The activities around building a technical community fall in between
```
```suggestion
shares it. The activities around building a technical community falls in between
```

> shares it. The activities around building a technical community falls in between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shares it. The activities around building a technical community fall in between
```
```suggestion
shares it. The activities around building a technical community falls in between
```

engineering, marketing, and customer enablement. A common name that encompasses
the individuals that work in this space is developer relations, DevRel for

> short. The TSF DevRel team has recently grown from the founding Developer

Reviewer: Drop the rest of the paragraph and replace it with something like

```
The goal of our work with the maintainers, contributors, users and all other members of the community is the following:
```

> short. The TSF DevRel team has recently grown from the founding Developer

Reviewer: Drop the rest of the paragraph and replace it with something like

```
The goal of our work with the maintainers, contributors, users and all other members of the community is the following:
```

Advocate, Brian, to the many folks on the call today. The mission around this
team is as follows:

> Grow all aspects of the Trino project, and the Trino community to empower
> current and future members of the community.

> We introduce some new faces that will be stewards in our journey to growing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We introduce some new faces who are stewards in our journey to growing the
```
```suggestion
We introduce some new faces that will be stewards in our journey to growing the
```

> We introduce some new faces that will be stewards in our journey to growing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We introduce some new faces who are stewards in our journey to growing the
```
```suggestion
We introduce some new faces that will be stewards in our journey to growing the
```

want to play around without having to bother or wait for anyone to respond. As
it stands today, there is some work that Brian and Monica have started to create
in this area to make the onboarding simpler. 

A very common self-service getting started material is the 
[trino-getting-started](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-getting-started)
repo that Brian created to house some demonstrations he does on this broadcast
to show off some new feature or connector capabilities. This has been a good
way to offer folks a simple environment to get them started, but the only way
to find this repository is to ask someone first. It would be ideal to showcase
getting started materials as part of the default experience of learning about
Trino.

Monica is working now on building up some demos using SaaS products like
Starburst Galaxy as another method of using Trino without needing to install
Docker among having to use any of your hardware to run through some examples.
These options are typically more UI driven and much more approachable by
members of the community that aren't engineers or administrators that simply

> want to try Trino without much setup.

Reviewer: Remove this line

reviewers, giving them some important context so they understand what's going on
when they review the code. For simpler changes, it's not usually necessary to go
into a ton of detail here, but it's usually nice to give a little summary if you
think it's appropriate.

The next steps are what really matter for every single PR that's going to be
merged - the documentation and release notes for a change. These are about
communicating to our users. Documentation refers to Trino docs, not code
comments - if Trino users will need to be told how to use the feature you're
changing because of how you're changing it, that means we need to have
documentation for it. The PR template gives the options for how to go about
this, but it's incredibly helpful to have this filled out. Similarly, we ask
whether or not release notes are necessary for the change, and what release
notes you would propose for your change. Generally speaking, if it needs to be
documented, it almost always should have a release note. Even if it isn't
documented, a release note might be a good idea - things like performance
improvements don't require our users to change how they use Trino, but they

> won't mind knowing that something has gotten faster/better! The release process

Reviewer: h
```suggestion
won't mind knowing that something has gotten better! The release process
```

involves heavy editing of release notes, so it's ok for the suggested note to be
imperfect.

### What is developer experience (DevEx)?

Trino is a technology that is built by developers but also heavily used by 
developers. We want to ensure that the experience of both contributors and users
of Trino is the best possible. To do that, we have to focus on many different
aspects of this experience, from committing code to the CLIs and tools we offer
for debugging queries and most importantly to building a sustainable community
that can give answers and drive the future of the project. This is what DX is
for Trino.

### Community metrics

A while ago we started gathering metrics related to [the Trino GitHub repository](https://github.com/trinodb/trino).
This helped us identify issues like huge CI queue times, but most importantly, verify
that the changes we made improved things, and how much. 

In February this year, the 95th percentile of the CI queue time (not even the total run time!)
was as high as almost 7 hours. Trino uses public GitHub runners and there can only be
60 jobs running concurrently at the same time. This is a bottleneck because Trino

> has extensive test coverage for the core engine and all plugins (connectors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has extensive test coverage for the core engine and all connectors and other plugins.
```

Because we can't increase the number of runners, we looked into doing impact analysis
to skip tests for modules not impacted by any change in a pull request.

Since April, the 95th percentile of the CI queue time is under 1 hour, even though the number of contributions
is at an all-time high.

We keep track of these selected metrics in reports we create by running queries using the Trino CLI,
saving the results in a markdown file and publishing them as static pages using GitHub pages.
The data is also gathered using third-party Trino connectors for the GitHub API and Git repositories.
There's a GitHub actions workflow running on a schedule, that spins up a Trino server, so there's no
infrastructure to maintain, except for a single S3 bucket.  

> All of it is publicly available in the [nineinchnick/trino-cicd](https://github.com/nineinchnick/trino-cicd) repository.  On the right, there's a link to GitHub pages with reports.

Reviewer: Wrap

> We keep adding more reports, like:

Reviewer: Make the rest as sentence..

* [flaky tests](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/flaky/)
* [pull request activity](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/pr/)

By being data-driven and transparent, we make sure to provide a neutral experience for all
and this also helps us figure out where we need more resources to focus on.

We're open to suggestions on what to track and which metrics to report on, so feel free
to open issues and pull requests in the repository mentioned above or start a thread on the Trino Slack.

### Pull request triage

One of the things we've been tracking over the last couple weeks has been the 
state of incoming PRs coming from community members. We wanted to make sure that
each PR reaches a maintainer, and that they all receive timely feedback after 
asking for a review. The goal in looking into this process was to help 

> streamline and improve the time-to-initial-comment, but the pleasant discovery 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
streamline and improve the time-to-initial-comment. The pleasant discovery 
```

is that it doesn't seem like we have a lot of room to improve on that front. Not
to pat ourselves on the back too heavily, but PRs find their way to maintainers
and get an initial review quite quickly, and there's little work to be done on
that front.

Our next exploration is going to be on tracking PRs that don't quickly get
approved and merged, and monitoring their life cycle and making sure follow-up

> reviews are happening in a timely manner as well. We now know that we've

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reviews are happening in a timely manner as well. We now know that we are
```

effective at giving initial feedback on a PR, but we also want to make sure that
these PRs aren't falling off a cliff or turning into a long, drawn-out process
where each development iteration is slower than the last.

## Pull requests of the episode: PR 12259: Support updating Iceberg table partitioning

This months [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/12259) 
was contributed by [alexjo2144](https://github.com/alexjo2144). This feature is
an exciting update on the ability to modify the partition specification of a 
table in Iceberg. This is an update since Brian 

> [wrote about this feature](https://trino.io/blog/2021/07/12/in-place-table-evolution-and-cloud-compatibility-with-iceberg.html)

Reviewer: use the post link syntax

self-explanatory - we ask you to describe what's happening, where the change is
happening, and what type of change it is. These are for the sake of the
reviewers, giving them some important context so they understand what's going on
when they review the code. For simpler changes, it's not usually necessary to go
into a ton of detail here, but it's usually nice to give a little summary if you
think it's appropriate.

The next steps are what really matter for every single PR that's going to be
merged - the documentation and release notes for a change. These are about
communicating to our users. Documentation refers to Trino docs, not code
comments - if Trino users will need to be told how to use the feature you're
changing because of how you're changing it, that means we need to have
documentation for it. The PR template gives the options for how to go about
this, but it's incredibly helpful to have this filled out. Similarly, we ask
whether or not release notes are necessary for the change, and what release
notes you would propose for your change. Generally speaking, if it needs to be
documented, it almost always should have a release note. Even if it isn't

> documented, a release note might be a good idea - things like performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
documented, a release note is often a good idea - things like performance
```

improvements don't require our users to change how they use Trino, but they
won't mind knowing that something has gotten better! The release process
involves heavy editing of release notes, so it's ok for the suggested note to be
imperfect.

### What is developer experience (DevEx)?

> Trino is a technology that is built by developers but also heavily used by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trino is a technology that is built by developers, but also heavily used by 
```

developers. We want to ensure that the experience of both contributors and users
of Trino is the best possible. To do that, we have to focus on many different
aspects of this experience, from committing code to the CLIs and tools we offer
for debugging queries and most importantly to building a sustainable community
that can give answers and drive the future of the project. This is what DX is
for Trino.

### Community metrics

A while ago we started gathering metrics related to [the Trino GitHub repository](https://github.com/trinodb/trino).

> This helped us identify issues like huge CI queue times, but most importantly, verify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helped us identify issues like huge CI queue times. Most importantly we. can verify
```

that the changes we made improved things, and how much. 

In February this year, the 95th percentile of the CI queue time (not even the 

> total run time!) was as high as almost 7 hours. Trino uses public GitHub runners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
total run time!) was as high as almost 7 hours. Trino uses public GitHub runners,
```

and there can only be 60 jobs running concurrently at the same time. This is a 

> bottleneck because Trino has extensive test coverage for the core engine and all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bottleneck because Trino has extensive test coverage for the core engine, all
```

> connectors and other plugins. Because we can't increase the number of runners,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connectors, and other plugins. Because we can't increase the number of runners,
```

we looked into doing impact analysis to skip tests for modules not impacted by
any change in a pull request.

Since April, the 95th percentile of the CI queue time is under 1 hour, even 
though the number of contributions is at an all-time high.

We keep track of these selected metrics in reports we create by running queries 

> using the Trino CLI, saving the results in a markdown file and publishing them 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using the Trino CLI, saving the results in a markdown file, and publishing them 
```

> as static pages using GitHub pages. The data is also gathered using third-party

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as static pages using GitHub pages. The data is gathered using 
```

Trino connectors for the GitHub API and Git repositories. There's a GitHub
actions workflow running on a schedule, that spins up a Trino server, so there's no
infrastructure to maintain, except for a single S3 bucket. All of it is publicly
available in the [nineinchnick/trino-cicd](https://github.com/nineinchnick/trino-cicd) 
repository. On the right, there's a link to GitHub pages with reports.

We continue to add more reports, like tracking flaky tests or pull request 

> activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
activity:

```

> * [flaky tests](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/flaky/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Flaky tests](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/flaky/)
```

> * [pull request activity](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/pr/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Pull request activity](https://nineinchnick.github.io/trino-cicd/reports/pr/)
```

> By being data-driven and transparent, we make sure to provide a neutral 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By being data-driven and transparent, we make sure to provide a good 
```

> experience for all and this also helps us figure out where we need more 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experience for everyone, and this also helps us figure out where we need more 
```

resources to focus on.

We're open to suggestions on what to track and which metrics to report on, so 

> feel free to open issues and pull requests in the repository mentioned above or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feel free to open issues and pull requests in the repository mentioned above, or
```

start a thread on the Trino Slack.

### Pull request triage

One of the things we've been tracking over the last couple weeks has been the 

> state of incoming PRs coming from community members. We wanted to make sure that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state of incoming PRs. We want to make sure that
```

each PR reaches a maintainer, and that they all receive timely feedback after 

> asking for a review. The goal in looking into this process was to help 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
asking for a review. The goal in looking into this process is to help 
```

streamline and improve the time-to-initial-comment. The pleasant discovery 
is that it doesn't seem like we have a lot of room to improve on that front. Not

> to pat ourselves on the back too heavily, but PRs find their way to maintainers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to pat ourselves on the back too heavily, but PRs find their way to maintainers,
```

and get an initial review quite quickly, and there's little work to be done on
that front.

> Our next exploration is going to be on tracking PRs that don't quickly get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our next exploration is tracking PRs that don't quickly get
```

approved and merged, and monitoring their life cycle and making sure follow-up
reviews are happening in a timely manner as well. We now know that we are
effective at giving initial feedback on a PR, but we also want to make sure that
these PRs aren't falling off a cliff or turning into a long, drawn-out process
where each development iteration is slower than the last.

## Pull requests of the episode: PR 12259: Support updating Iceberg table partitioning

This months [PR of the episode](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/12259) 
was contributed by [alexjo2144](https://github.com/alexjo2144). This feature is
an exciting update on the ability to modify the partition specification of a 
table in Iceberg. This is an update since Brian 
[wrote about this feature]({% post_url 2021-07-12-in-place-table-evolution-and-cloud-compatibility-with-iceberg %})

> 

Reviewer: Remove this empty line

/**
 * Inserting three records. Notice event_time is on the same day but different hours.
 */
INSERT INTO iceberg.logging.logs VALUES 
(
  'ERROR', 
  timestamp '2021-04-01 15:55:23' AT TIME ZONE 'America/Los_Angeles', 
  '3 message', 
  ARRAY ['Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NullPointerException']
), 
(
  'WARN', 
  timestamp '2021-04-01 15:55:23' AT TIME ZONE 'America/Los_Angeles', 
  '4 message', 
  ARRAY ['bad things could be happening']
), 
(
  'WARN', 
  timestamp '2021-04-01 16:55:23' AT TIME ZONE 'America/Los_Angeles', 
  '5 message', 
  ARRAY ['bad things could be happening']
);

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs;
SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging."logs$partitions";

/**
 * Now there are three partitions:
 * 1) One partition at the day granularity containing our original records.
 * 2) One at the hour granularity for hour 15 containing two new records.
 * 3) One at the hour granularity for hour 16 containing the last new record.
 */

SELECT * FROM iceberg.logging.logs 
WHERE event_time < timestamp '2021-04-01 16:55:23' AT TIME ZONE 'America/Los_Angeles';

/**
 * This query correctly returns 4 records with only the first two partitions
 * being touched. 
 */

```

> There's been a lot of cool things going into the Iceberg connector these days

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's been a lot of cool things going into the Iceberg connector these days,
```

and another exciting one that came out in release 381 was the support for 
[`UPDATE` in Iceberg](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12026). So we're 

> gonna showcase that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gonna showcase that:
```
